Surfing the Internet
What is the Internet?
Questions to ponder
Buildings like schools and houses are the websites. For example, YouTube
is a website! There are various websites on the internet which give you different
things like videos, pictures, information, items to shop, services, etc.
Let’s think of the city we live in. There are many streets and roads that take you
to different buildings, playgrounds, schools, and other places.The Internet is like
a big city with many roads connecting different places. These roads are the
connections between computers.
Uses of the Internet
Ÿ Learning:You can search for information, watch videos, and read articles to
 learn about your various topics.
Ÿ Communication: You can send emails, video call your friends, or message
family members.
Ÿ Shopping: You can buy clothes, shoes, books, toys, and many more items
online, just like visiting a store in your city.
Ÿ Sharing: You can share pictures, videos, and ideas with friends.
Ÿ Entertainment: You can play games, watch cartoons, or listen to music.
Internet Terms
Ÿ World Wide Web (www): The World Wide Web is like the entire internet
city where you will find all the websites (buildings). It’s a big network that
connects everything together.
Ÿ Website: A website is like a building in the internet city. Just like different
buildings have different uses (like schools or shops), websites have different
uses. For example, YouTube is a website for videos, Google is a website for
searching information, Amazon is a website to shop for things.
Surfing the Internet 7
Ÿ Web Page: A web page is like a room inside a building. When you visit a
website, each page you see (like a room) is a web page that has different
information. For example, when you visit a news website, each one page
article is a separate web page.
Ÿ Home Page: The home page is like the front door of a house. It’s the first
page you see when you visit a website.
Ÿ Web Browser: A web browser is like a car that helps you travel on the
internet’s roads. You need it to visit websites and go from one place to
another. Some popular web browsers are Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox,
Microsoft Edge, Safari, and Opera.
The browser asks you the name of the place(website) you would like to visit. You
type it in a box called the address bar, and as soon as you press enter after
writing the name of the website, it opens on your screen.
Google Chrome web browser is shown in the above picture.
Components of Web Browsers
8 PW Binary Brains - 3
Chrome Safari Firefox
Edge Opera Internet Explorer
Ÿ Address bar:Type the name of the website you want to visit.
(Example: www.kiddle.co, www.amazon.in, www.britannica.
com, www.e-periwinkle.in)
Step 3: Click on the Start button that is present at the bottom of the screen.
Ÿ Previous page: Takes you back to the page/website you visited before.
Ÿ Search bar:Type the topic about which you need information.
How to Find Information Online?
Step 2: Choose a browser.(Example: Google Chrome)
Step 1: Decide what information you are looking for on the internet.
Ÿ Refresh: Reloads the current page.
Ÿ Next page:Takes you to the next page/ website you have visited.
Step 4:Search the name of the browser in the search bar.
Step 5: Double click on the icon to open it or click on the Open option given below
the icon.
Step 6:Type your question in the search box.
Surfing the Internet 9
Step 7:Press enter.
Step 8: Go through the results. Click on the website that you think will give you
relevant information on the topic that you are looking for.
the internet. You can upload your work, pictures, videos, presentations,
Download and Upload Files
1. Downloading files: It is like getting a package from the internet to
your computer. You can download pictures, videos, documents, books, etc.
from the internet.
2. Uploading files: It is like sending a package from your computer to
documents, etc.
10 PW Binary Brains - 3
Note: Be careful while you upload and download files. Always ask your
parents/teachers before uploading or downloading any file.
Steps to download a picture
Step 1: Open any browser (like chrome, safari, internet explorer etc).
Step 2: Type the name or some information about the picture you want to
download.
Step 3: Choose the Images option.
Surfing the Internet 11
Step 4: See the image you like. Right-click on it. A menu with various options
opens.
Step 5: Click on the Save image as... option. Enter the name with which you
want it to be saved in the File name box. Choose the location you want it to be
saved by scrolling the scroll bar to the left side. Here the Downloads folder is
selected.
Step 6: Click Save.
Congratulations! You just downloaded an image.
12 PW Binary Brains - 3
Where to Find Downloaded Files on the Computer?
Step 1: Open File Explorer present at the bottom of the screen by clicking on
the file explorer icon.
Step 2: Open the Downloads folders by clicking on it.
Step 3: You will see all downloaded files in this folder.
Activity: Use any of the browsers to find the names of all the states in
India, their capital cities, and their famous food.
Surfing the Internet 13
Caselet
Aarush’s Planet Discovery
He asked his mother if he could get that gift by clicking the button. His
mother said, “You should not enter any personal details for free gifts or
prizes. Always remember sharing your personal details on any website is
not safe.”
Questions for discussion:
Aarush wanted to know more about the solar system and the planets. He
asked his mom if he could use her smartphone to search for information
online.
His mom gave him her phone but also told him to be safe and cautious.
Aarush searched about the solar system and got to know many fun facts
about it. He found out that Jupiter is the largest planet among all the others.
He saw various images and videos explaining special facts about Jupiter
and other planets. While searching for more information, he came across
an advertisement that asked him “Enter your name, date of birth, address,
and phone number. Click for a gift.”
1. What did Aarush’s mom ask him to remember?
2. Why did Aarush not give his personal details to win the gift?
Aarush thanked his mother for allowing him to use her phone. He had a lot
of fun learning about planets and online safety.
Safety while Using the Internet
Ÿ Do not communicate with unknown people while using the internet.
Ÿ Be respectful to others online.
Ÿ If any website makes you feel scared or
uncomfortable, always tell your parents first.
Ÿ Do not share your personal information such as
passwords, or phone numbers with anyone
while using the internet, even if they ask you
nicely.
Ÿ Do not click on any advertisments on the
website that ask you to download or install files.
Ÿ Always ask your parents before downloading
anything from the internet.
14 PW Binary Brains - 3
Points to Remember
Did you know?
Ÿ Always tell a parent or teacher if something online makes you
uncomfortable.
Ÿ Never share personal information, avoid clicking on
Ÿ The internet is useful for learning, communication, entertainment,
shopping, and sharing.
Ÿ Open a browser, type your question in the search bar, press enter,
and click on suitable results to find information.
Ÿ Downloading is like getting a package from the internet, while
uploading is like sending a package to the internet.
advertisements.
Ÿ The internet is like a big city with roads connecting computers.
Websites are like buildings in this city that have videos, pictures,
shopping, and more.
Ÿ A web browser, like Google Chrome, is a tool that helps you explore
the internet.
Ÿ The internet was invented on January 1, 1983.
Ÿ The first ever website was made in 1991 and it is still working.
Its name is info.cern.ch.
Surfing the Internet 15
A. Tick mark the tasks that are done online.
WORKSTATION
B. Amit wants to do a project on animals. He wants to include pictures
 and information about animals in his project. The steps to complete this
 project are given below. Arrange them in the correct order.
Ÿ Decide what types of animals he wants to include in his project.
Ÿ Look at the results and click on the websites that seem to have the
information he needs.
Ÿ Choose a web browser to use for the research.
Ÿ Write down interesting facts and information about each animal.
and press enter.
Ÿ Type the question or the name of the animal in the search box
Ÿ Collect pictures of each animal from the websites he visits.
watching videos
drawing a picture in
a book
shopping
playing a game
chatting with friends
cooking dinner
downloading images
planting a tree
attending a class
watering plants
sending an email
riding a bicycle
searching for
information
reading an ebook
1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
16 PW Binary Brains - 3
C. Match column ‘A’ to column ‘B’.
4. Safari
2. Chrome
3. Opera
Web Browser Logos
1. Firefox
Surfing the Internet 17
D. What will you do if? (answer in 1-2 lines)
4. You find a website with interesting information, but it asks you to
 download a file to read more.
Ans.
3. You come across a website that asks for your parent’s credit card
 information to play a game.
Ans.
1. You receive a message from someone you don’t know asking for your
 home address.
Ans.
2. You’re using a device that is not yours, and it asks if you want to save your
 password for easy login next time.
Ans.
Mini Project - Search for information about 'How to Stay Safe Online'. Note
down any 6 points you find in your search in the Notepad application. Also
mention the search engine you used, and the name of the website you took
the information from. Save the document.
18 PW Binary Brains - 3
Ÿ How do you send images and videos to people who live
 far away other than using WhatsApp?
Ÿ What do you think an email does?
2 Understanding Emails
What is Email?
Questions to ponder
6. Many websites and apps need an email ID to join.
Ÿ lnternet connection
Things you need to send an email:
Uses of Email
We use postal services, and courier services in our real lives to send messages,
and things to each other. Similarly, EMAIL is the postal service used through the
internet. You need a device like a phone, laptop, desktop, or tablet to send or
receive an email. The full form of email is electronic mail.
1. Email is a reliable and legal mode of communication that allows users to
 send and receive documents, images, links, and other files.
2. It is used for personal communication, such as sending messages to
 friends and family.
3. It is used for professional communication, like sharing important updates
 or tasks with other people working on the same task.
4. Businesses use email for marketing, sending offers, and updates to
 customers.
5. Emails are also used to apply for jobs in companies.
Ÿ a device such as a phone, laptop, desktop, tablet
Ÿ Email ID
What is an Email ID?
We have a specific unique address for our house, in the same way, you need a
unique address for your email. This address is called an email ID. Email ID is
your unique identity on the internet.
Understanding Emails 19
There are two components in an email id:
1. your unique name
2. domain name
Domain name is like the company or the person who delivers your mail.
just like there are various companies that provide services for sending courier
packages, in the same way, there are various email service providers, each
of them having different domain names.
A few domains are: @gmail.com, @yahoo.com, @outlook.com.
An email ID is read as: aaryamahajan12@gmail.com
A dot (.) can be used in the email address, but it should not be the first or last
 character, and there should never be two dots in a row.
 Underscore(_) is not allowed in the domain name.
Ÿ special characters: !#$%&'*+-/=?^_`{|}~
Ÿ uppercase and lowercase: letters A to Z and a to z
Ÿ digits: 0 to 9
Your unique name can contain
aarya mahajan twelve at gmail dot com
or
aarya mahajan one two at gmail dot com
gmail yahoo outlook
20 PW Binary Brains - 3
Activity: Take help from one of your parents to create a Google account
for you. Use one of your parents’ phones to create the Google account.
 Here are the steps to create a child account on Google:
Step 1: Download and install the Google Family
Link app on your phone from the Play Store
(Android) or App Store (iPhone).
Step 2: Open the Family Link app and sign in
with your Google account (as a parent). If you
don't have a Google account, you will need to
create one first.
Step 3: Click on No, and start
creating your child's account.
Understanding Emails 21
Step 4: Enter the details and choose an email address for your child
(ending with @gmail.com) and set up a password. (here for example the
child’s name is Anvi Sharma).
Step 5: Enter your mobile number and the verification code sent.
Step 6: Read the terms and conditions and click on I agree.
22 PW Binary Brains - 3
Step 7: Verify yourself with the help of biometrics or PIN after clicking on
Continue.
Step 8: Your child's account is now created. Click Yes.
Step 9: If your child has a personal device follow these steps and click Done.
Understanding Emails 23
Step 10: Review your child’s account settings, including what they can
access, such as apps and websites, and then confirm.
Note for parents:
Give your child his/her credentials that is their email ID and password and
explain to them to use the same safely and never share their password
with anybody else.
How to Log in to your Google Account on Other Devices?
To log in to your Google account on another device, follow these steps:
Step 3: Type your Google email address (Example: name@gmail.com) or the
phone number associated with your account.
Step 2: Go to Google’s Sign-In page, in a web browser, search
accounts.google.com. If using an app, tap "Sign In" if prompted.
Step 1: Open a browser (Example: Chrome, Firefox, Safari) or a Google-related
app (Gmail, YouTube) on the new device.
24 PW Binary Brains - 3
Step 4: Press the Next button.
Step 5: Type your Google account password.
Step 6: Press the Next button after entering the password.
Step 7: If you have two-step verification enabled, you will need to confirm a
code sent to your phone or email or confirm using your Google Authenticator
app.
Step 8: Once verified, you will be logged in and can start using Google
services on the new device.
Understanding Emails 25
Step 1: Login to your Google account.
Steps to open email to check mails
Step 2: Click on Google apps.
Step 3: Click on the Gmail icon.
Step 4: This is how the gmail interface looks.
26 PW Binary Brains - 3
The main menu consists of
Components of Email
Ÿ Compose: This is where you click to start writing
a new email to send to someone.
Ÿ Inbox: This is where all the new emails you
receive from others are stored.
Ÿ Starred: You can put a "star" on important emails
so you can find them quickly later in this folder.
Ÿ Sent: This is where you can see all the emails
you have sent to other people.
Ÿ Snoozed: If you want to read an email later, you
can snooze it so it comes back at a time you choose.
Ÿ Drafts: If you start writing an email but don’t finish
it, it’s saved here so you can finish and send it later.
2. Subject Line: Describe in short what your email is about.
1. To: The unique address(email ID) of the person to whom you want to send
 an email.
3. Body: This section contains the text or information you want to send.
Body
Understanding Emails 27
Example of a good email:
Step 8: End with a polite ending (Example: Best regards, Aarya).
Step 6: Start with a polite opening (Example: Dear Gouri).
Step 3: Click the Compose button to start a new email.
Step 7: Type the main content of the email.
5. Send Button: When you click on the send button your email is delivered.
4. Attachments: The extra items like pictures, and documents that you want to
send along with your message. Click on the paper clip symbol and select files
from your device to send it with email.
How to Compose an Email?
Step 1: Login to your account.
Step 2: Open your email.
Step 4: In the “To” field, type your friend’s email address.
Step 5: In the Subject field type a brief summary of the email’s content.
Step 9: Click on the Send button.
28 PW Binary Brains - 3
Activity: Write an email to your cousin inviting him/her to your school's
annual day to watch your performance. Do not forget to mention the date,
time, and place.
We encourage parents to actively participate in their child’s online activities.
Regularly discuss and monitor the content they surf, and set privacy settings.
Guidelines for Parents
Ÿ Enable Safe Search for Google Search.
To know more you can visit:
https://families.google.com/familylink/privacy/notice
Ÿ Set screen time limits on your child’s devices.
3. Always be polite while writing an email.
Tips to be Safe while Sending/Receiving Email
1. Be careful before sharing your email ID on any website, ask your teacher/
 parents first.
Ÿ Control YouTube settings for YouTube and YouTube Kids.
What can you do as a parent with Family Link?
Ÿ See the location of your child’s signed-in devices.
Ÿ Approve or limit downloads and purchases.
Ÿ Manage activity settings to personalise your child’s experience.
Ÿ Review app permissions like microphone and camera access.
2. Use a password that you can remember easily. Do not share your
 password with anyone except your parents.
4. Write in complete sentences, and use proper spelling and grammar.
5. Do not open the emails from unknown senders.
6. Always check your email before you send it.
Understanding Emails 29
Caselet
 The Trick Email
Questions for discussion:
2. Should you always click on any links sent in the email? Why?
1. Why do you think Swathi asked her dad before clicking on the link to
get that game?
Her dad said, “Always be careful with emails from senders whom you do
not know. Ignore such emails and never share your personal information
without checking.” Swathi was glad she asked her dad and learnt about
emails that can trick us into getting our information.
Swathi loved playing games on her computer. One day she received an
email with a link to download a game for free. The email looked strange.
It read “Get it for free, just click the button” and had unclear images with
it. Swathi remembered her teacher’s advice about being careful online.
Instead of clicking on the link, she decided to ask her dad for advice.
Swathi showed the email to her dad and asked, “Should I click on this link
to get the game?” Her dad looked at the email and explained, “Swathi,
this email looks strange, the images are not clear. Sometimes, harmful
websites try to trick us and take our personal information. It’s good that
you asked me first.”
30 PW Binary Brains - 3
Ÿ The longest email ID can have 320 characters.
Ÿ The first email was sent in 1971.
Points to Remember
Did you know?
Ÿ You can send an email to many people at the same time.
Just try typing their email ID in the “To” section one after
the other separated by a comma and a space.
Ÿ Do not click on any links which seem strange.
Ÿ E-mail stands for Electronic Mail.
Ÿ An email ID helps you send and receive messages, pictures,
documents, etc.
Ÿ An email ID has two parts- a unique name and a domain name.
Ÿ Emails can be sent and received on the internet through any
laptop, desktop, smartphone, or tablet with an internet connection.
Ÿ Emails need to be polite and clear.
Ÿ Do not open emails from unknown senders.
 information.
Ÿ Ask parents'/teachers' advice before sharing personal
Understanding Emails 31
A. Given below are some tips to be followed while writing an email. Circle
 the tips that are not followed in the sample given below.
WORKSTATION
This email has some mistakes. Here are some hints:
 it?___________________
1. We always say "Hello" or "Dear" at the start of an email. Does this email
 have that?___________________
2. A subject helps the reader know what the email is about. Check the
 subject of the given email.___________________
3. Look at the "To" field. Did the writer add the email address of the person
 they are sending it to?___________________
4. Can you spot if the text colour changes? Usually, we use the same colour
 throughout.___________________
5. We end an email politely. What should we write at the end, before sending
32 PW Binary Brains - 3
 B. Answer the following questions by choosing the correct option.
 C. Determine whether the following email addresses are valid or invalid,
 and write your answer in the box.
1. priya.gmail.com
2. my.name.is.ram@g_mail_.com
3. raj@yahoo.com
4. shreya/patil@outlook.com
5. aarya.pandey@gmail.com
6. John..Doe@gmail.com
1. What is the full form of email?
a. easy mail b. electronic mail
c. efficient mail d. express mail
2. Which of the following is NOT an email domain?
a. @gmail.com
3. What do you need to send an email?
a. a bank address
c. an email address
4. Which part of an email address identifies the email service provider?
a. username
5. What is the main purpose of the “Subject” line in an email?
a. to greet the recipient
c. to include attachments
b. @yahoo.com
c. @outlook.com d. @letter.com
b. domain name
c. password d. subject line
b. a roll number
d. a home address
d. to sign off the email
b. to summarise thecontent of the email
Understanding Emails 33
Mini Project - Write an email to your class teacher wishing him/her a Happy
Teacher’s Day and thanking him/her.
1. Name the two components of an email id.
Ans.
2. List any 3 uses of email.
Ans.
3. How is this email address “ harsh123@gmail.com” read?
Ans.
E. Answer the following questions.
 D. State whether the following statements are True or False.
1. You can send videos through email.
2. You should always click on any links sent to you in an email
 if they offer free things.
3. Every email address has an "@" symbol in it.
4. Email IDs can only contain letters and numbers; special
 characters are not allowed.
34 PW Binary Brains - 3
3 Google Maps
Questions to ponder
A map is a diagram that shows an area of land or water and helps us understand
where things are located. It shows important features like cities, roads, rivers,
lakes, and buildings. Maps are useful for finding directions and understanding how
to travel from one place to another.
 What is a Map?
 does it give?
Ÿ Have you heard the voice of a digital map? What instructions
Ÿ How can you find a way to go to a city or a place you have
 never been to before?
 What is Google Maps?
Imagine you want to visit a friend’s house for the first time, and instead of asking
different people for directions or looking at signboards, you have a guide who can
always show you the way, no matter where you are.
Google Maps is an app that helps you find places and shows you how to reach
there. These places can be within your neighbourhood and city like parks,
museums, shops, etc. The places can be far away from each other. For example,
how to reach from one city to another city.
Google Maps on your iPhone from the app store.
The app also shows information about different modes of transport such as twowheeler, car, bus, train, and walking, that can be used to reach from one
place to another.
Google Maps is like that guide. It helps you find the best routes to places, whether
you are walking, driving, or using public transport, anytime you need it.
The Google Maps app is already present on Android phones. You can install
Maps is also an app present on iPhone that will help you show directions to
various places.
Google Maps 35
Steps to Open Google Maps on a Computer
Step 1: Open a browser.
Step 2: Search Google Maps in the Search bar.
Step 3: Click on the result to open Google Maps.
Once you open Google Maps you will see something like below on your screen.
It will differ from place to place.
Exploring Google Maps
To get directions to a place follow the steps given below.
Step 1: Open Google Maps.
1. Directions: The Directions feature in Google Maps helps you find the best
route to reach a destination. You can get step-by-step directions for driving,
walking, biking, or using public transportation.
It also provides estimated travel times, distance, and alternate routes, helping
you plan your trip efficiently.
36 PW Binary Brains - 3
Step 2: Enter the name of the place in the search bar. For example here, we
have searched The Red Fort Delhi.
Step 3: Press enter.
Step 4: Click on Directions and enter the starting location. You can choose the
“Your location” option to get directions from your current location to the
location you have searched.
Google Maps 37
Step 5: You can choose the mode of transport you are using. The right hand side
will show you the route and alternate routes to reach your destination. You can
also see the approximate time taken and the distance in kilometres.
You can plan your trip or visit to a place accordingly.
You can search other places like restaurants, petrol pumps, pharmacies
(medical stores) near you. Explore the different icons that represent these
places.
2. Layers: The Layers icon is present at the bottom left of the screen.
Even if you don't know the name of the place you can always ask Google Maps.
Example: Medical shops near me, hotels near me.
38 PW Binary Brains - 3
Layers in Google Maps on your desktop help you view different types of
information on the map, making it easier to understand and navigate. Here are
some common uses of layers:
Ÿ Traffic Layer: This layer shows real-time traffic conditions, highlighting areas
with slow or heavy traffic.
Ÿ Map View: This is the default view that shows streets, buildings, and
landmarks.
Ÿ Satellite View: This layer gives you a real-world view of locations with
detailed satellite imagery.
Ÿ Transit Layer: This layer displays public transportation routes, such as bus,
train, and metro lines.
Ÿ Terrain Layer: This layer shows the landscape of an area, including hills,
mountains, and elevation.
Click on the Layers icon to see the above mentioned layers.
When you click on More you can see other options as well. Explore these
options.
Google Maps 39
3. Show your current location: This icon looks like a small target or circle. It's
located in the bottom-right corner of the screen.
Click on the icon, and click on Allow on every visit option to give access to your
current location.
For example, when we select the Traffic layer we can see the live traffic
conditions on the roads. Here green lines indicate that traffic on that road is
moving fast, and red lines indicate traffic on that road is moving slowly.
40 PW Binary Brains - 3
The blue dot is your current location.
4. Browse Street View images: The Browse Street View image icon is
present in the bottom right corner in the form of a yellow figure.
When you click on the icon the streets that are available in Street View will be
highlighted in blue. Street View in Google Maps allows you to explore places at
ground level with 360 degree images. You can virtually "walk" through streets,
see buildings, and landmarks, and get a real-life feel of an area. It's useful for
checking out places before visiting or getting a better idea of your destination.
Google Maps 41
Google Maps is also available on smartphones. Few different features are
provided on our phones. They are:
Google Maps on Phone
Click on the blue line or blue circle shown on the location you wish to visit and
use your mouse to look around and explore the area. Press the left button on
your mouse and move it to look around in that location.
1. Offline Maps: On the mobile app, you can download maps to use without an
internet connection, which is useful when you are travelling in areas with poor
signal or no data access.
2. Turn-by-Turn Navigation with Voice Guidance: The app provides real-time,
step by-step navigation with voice instructions for driving, walking, or cycling,
which isn't available on the desktop version.
4. Nearby Feature with Personalised Recommendations: The app suggests
nearby places like restaurants, cafes, or points of interest based on your
preferences and location. It also provides updates on whether these places are
busy in real time.
5. Timeline View: You can see your past trips, routes, and places you've visited
over time, which is synced through your Google account but only accessible fully
on mobile.
You can try exploring these features on Google Maps on phone under your
parents’ observation.
3. Live Location Sharing: You can share your live location with others for a
specific period directly from your phone.
42 PW Binary Brains - 3
For exampleName of the place: Taj Mahal
Holiday: Not mentioned
Contact information (It can be phone number or website):
https://www.tajmahal.gov.in/
Activity: Feature Hunt
You can find the website, phone number, timings of opening and closing of
places if they are uploaded by the owner of the place.
Search your school on Google Maps and write down the following
information.
1. Name of the place:
2. Opening and closing timings (if displayed):_________________________
3. Holiday (if mentioned): _____________
4. Contact information (It can be a phone number or website):
Press on Directions (if you are at home) and see the route from your
home to school as displayed on maps.
Google Maps 43
Caselet
 From Paper Maps to Digital Maps
Her grandmother was surprised and said, “When I was young, we used
big paper maps. They were fun but sometimes hard to use.” Riddhi
asked, “Why was it difficult to use those maps?” Her grandmother
explained that the paper maps would get dirty very soon and then tear.
Questions for discussion:
1. Why are digital maps better than big paper maps?
Riddhi had learnt about Google Maps at school. When she went home
after school, she went to tell her grandmother and aunt all about Google
Maps. She said, “Today our teacher taught us about a website that is on
the internet and an app that is on our phone that knows the way to reach
any place in the world.”
Riddhi’s aunt reminded her, “Google Maps is helpful, but be careful. Do
not follow the shortcuts or roads shown if you do not feel safe. Such
roads make you lose your way.” Riddhi promised to be safe and was
happy to share what she had learnt.
2. Why did Riddhi’s aunt ask her to be careful while using Google Maps?
44 PW Binary Brains - 3
Points to Remember
Ÿ Features of Google Maps in computers are: Directions for routes
and travel times, Layers, Show Current Location and Street View for
a 360-degree view.
Terrain.
Ÿ A map is a diagram that shows an area of land or water and helps
us understand where things are located.
Ÿ Google Maps is an app that helps you find places and the best
routes to reach a place by car, walking, or public transport.
Ÿ The different layers are Map, Satellite, Traffic, Transit, and
Ÿ Features of Google Maps in mobile are: Offline Maps,
Voice Navigation, Live Location Sharing, Nearby
Recommendations, and Timeline View for past trips.
Did you know?
Ÿ The first map was made on a solid clay piece.
Ÿ An Atlas is a book or collection of maps.
Google Maps 45
A. Match the following places and the icons that are seen in Google Maps.
WORKSTATION
d. petrol pump
e. ATM
b. hospital
c. restaurant
Column A Column B
a. live location
H
46 PW Binary Brains - 3
B. Parth is trying to go to a shop near his house. He wants to go there
 walking. Steps are given, arrange them in the right order.
Ÿ Choose your mode of travel.
Ÿ Start navigation.
Ÿ Select the place from the results after the search.
Ÿ Follow the road shown.
Ÿ Open Google Maps.
Ÿ Search for a place.
Ÿ Get directions.
C. Answer the following questions by choosing the correct option.
d. all of the above
4. Which of the following features of Google Maps is not available on the
computer?
a. get directions
b. seeing your current location
c. using maps offline
d. browse street view images
a. a picture or drawing that shows the location of different places
b. a book that tells stories
c. a device that plays music
d. a tool used for cooking
1. What is a map?
2. What is Google Maps?
a. an app that helps you find places and gives directions
b. a game you play on your phone
c. a tool for drawing pictures
d. a social media platform
b. museums
3. Which of the following can you find using Google Maps?
a. parks
c. shops
1
Google Maps 47
1. What is a map?
Ans.
E. Answer the following questions.
2. What is the use of Google Maps?
Ans.
3. Name any 3 features of Google Maps available on the computer and explain
 them in short.
Ans.
D. State whether the following statements are True or False.
1. You need an internet connection to use Google Maps on the phone all
 the time.
2. Google Maps can show you only the places that are in your city.
3. On Google Maps, you can see information about the places
 you have searched.
Mini Project - Search for a popular landmark or monument in your city and
check the directions to reach there from your home or school.
48 PW Binary Brains - 3
4 Microsoft Word (Part 1)
Questions to ponder
Introduction to Microsoft Word
Ÿ What do you mean by word processing?
Ÿ How can we maintain all our documents on a computer?
Microsoft Word, Google Docs, and WPS Office are some of the famous word
processors. We will learn about Microsoft Word in this chapter.
A Word Processor is a computer program used for writing, editing, and
formatting text. It helps you type, change, and organise your work. You can also
add pictures, change colours, and make the text look how you want.
In the past, people relied on notebooks and papers to write and store information.
This, at times, made it hard to edit what was written, store information, or keep
things updated. Searching for a note or updating old information took a lot of
time. All of this can now be done faster and more efficiently with a Word
Processor.
With Microsoft Word, writing has become easier. Now, we can easily type, edit,
and update documents without the trouble of flipping through pages or rewriting
everything. It also allows us to add pictures, colour the text, and apply special
effects, making it easier to organise and present information clearly.
 Microsoft Word (Part 1) 49
Components of Word Window
Open Microsoft Word and Create a New Document
Step 1: Click on the Start button.
Step 2: Search “Word” in the search bar, and click on Open.
Step 3: Choose New. Click on the Blank document option.
50 PW Binary Brains - 3
1. Title bar: Present on top of the window. The title bar displays the name of the
document.
2. Quick Access Toolbar: Contains commonly used buttons like Redo, Undo,
and Save.
4. Ribbon: The group of tools and tabs is called the Ribbon.
5. Text/Document Area: You can type the text in this text area. You can press
the enter key to write on the next line.
6. Status bar: The rectangular box at the bottom of the screen is called the
Status bar. It shows the page number and number of words typed.
7. Vertical scrollbar: Used to move up and down in a document. It’s on the right
side.
9. Cursor: The vertical line blinking is called a cursor. It shows the position
where the type will appear.
3. Tabs: They are located below the quick access toolbar. It consists of File,
Home, Insert, Draw, Design, Layout, Reference, Mailing Review, View, Help.
Each tab has specific functions and tasks.
8. Horizontal scrollbar: Used to move left and right in a document. It's above
the Status bar.
Tabs in Microsoft Word
1. File tab: This tab helps you to open, save, print, or close your document.
2. Home tab: This tab allows you to change how your text looks. You can make
words bold, change colours, and choose different fonts (styles of letters). It
also gives paragraph setting options to choose from.
3. Insert tab: Use this tab to add fun things like pictures, shapes, or tables to
your page.
4. Draw tab: This tab lets you draw or write with different tools like pen or pencil
on your document.
 Microsoft Word (Part 1) 51
8. Mailings tab: This tab helps you create letters and envelopes or send
documents to many people.
10. View tab: This helps you look at your page in different ways.
6. Layout tab: Here, you can change how your page is set up, like making the
space around the edges bigger or smaller.
7. References tab: If you want to add special notes or a list of sources, this tab
helps you do that.
5. Design tab: This tab helps you to make changes to how your page looks. You
can add designs and borders to your pages.
11. Help tab: The Help tab gives you tips on how to use Microsoft Word.
 Example: Seeing two pages side by side.
9. Review tab: This is where you check your work. You can correct spelling
 mistakes and see and add suggestions.
 Each tab has its own special functions on the ribbon to help you write, edit
 and format!
Formatting Text
Step 2: Drag the cursor (mouse) to the end of the text.
Step 3: Release the mouse button to complete the selection.
Step 4: The selected text will be highlighted.
Step 1: Click and hold the left mouse button at the beginning of the text you want
to select.
To format text in Word you need to select it.
How to Select Text?
52 PW Binary Brains - 3
1. Font style
The font is like the "style" of your writing. You can choose from many different
styles to make your words look fancy, funny, or serious. You can see different
styles by clicking on the drop down that is on the right in the font style.
A few different font styles are shown below.
Ÿ Italics (I): Slants your words, like they are leaning forward.
Ÿ Underline (U): Draws a line under your words to show they are important.
Ÿ Bold (B): Makes your words stronger to grab attention.
Step 1: Type some text.
Step 2: Select the text.
Step 3: Apply the Bold, Italics, and Underline styles.
 Microsoft Word (Part 1) 53
The options are:
4. Text alignment
Ÿ Align Left
Ÿ Justify
Step 1: Type some text.
Step 2: Select your text.
Step 3: Select the alignment you need, you have four options for alignment.
Ÿ Align Right
Ÿ Align Center
Step 2: Click the drop down beside the font colour icon.
Step 3: Choose the colour you want from the various colours shown.
The size changes how big or small your words appear. We use big letters for
titles and small letters for writing details. Click on the drop down and select the
font size you want. You can select the size before you start typing or select the
typed text and change the font size as required.
2. Font size
Step 1: Select the text.
3. Font colour
54 PW Binary Brains - 3
Ÿ Tiger
Ÿ Lion
Ÿ Elephant
Ÿ Giraffe
Ÿ Kangaroo
6. Numbering
Helps you to create a numbered list.
Step 1: Write 5-7 names of cities, one on each line.
Step 2: Select your text.
Step 3: Click on the drop down to the right of the numbering library icon and
select the numbering style you want.
A small symbol used to mark every item in a list is called a bullet.
5. Bullets
Step 1: Write 5 names of wild animals, one on each line.
Step 2: Select your text.
Step 3: Click on the down arrow beside the bullets option, and select the bullet
style you want.
4. Chennai
3. Mumbai
1. Delhi
2. Pune
5. Kolkata
 Microsoft Word (Part 1) 55
Save a Document and Open a Saved Document
Step 1: Click on the File tab.
Step 2: Select Save as.
Save a Document
3. Select the rhyming words and change their font colour to red.
Activity: Write down your favourite English rhyming poem and carry out
the following tasks
1. Select the title of the poem, make it bold and centre aligned, and
 change the font size to 16.
 New Roman.
2. Select the poem you have written and change its font style to Times
56 PW Binary Brains - 3
Step 4: Write the name of the file that you would remember later.
Step 5: Click the Save button.
Step 3: Choose the location where you want to save your document.
 Microsoft Word (Part 1) 57
Step 3: Click on the location where the document is saved or search the name
of the document in the search box.
Step 4: Click on the document and it opens.
Step 5: You can add or remove something from this document. Save it again so
that the changes are saved and seen the next time you open the document.
Activity: Create a Microsoft Word document. Type 10 lines about “My
Favourite Festival”. Select your text, and see what a text effect tool can do.
Open a Saved Document
Step 1: Open Word.
Step 2: Click on Open from the File menu.
58 PW Binary Brains - 3
Caselet
 Notepad and Word Working Together
2. Why do you think some people prefer Notepad for simple tasks
instead of Microsoft Word?
Notepad was worried that no one would use it, and everyone would only
use Word. But soon it saw that people used both the apps. They used
Notepad to make simple notes and lists. They used Word to make big
complex documents. Notepad was happy since more and more school
children used Notepad first to learn typing before learning Word. They
both co-existed together.
1. What are the key differences between Notepad and Microsoft
Once there were two friends named Notepad and Microsoft Word. They
both helped people write, but they did it in different ways. Notepad was
simpler than Microsoft Word.
Word?
Questions for discussion:
Microsoft Word let people do more along with their writing. You could
make the letters bigger or smaller, change the colour, and make the
words bold or italic. You could even add pictures or lists to your writing.
Did you know?
Ÿ If you need to select all the text in the
document you can do it by pressing ctrl
and A keys together.
Ÿ If you see a red curvy line below any of your written words,
it means the spelling of the word is wrong. Right-click on it
to see the correct spelling.
Ÿ Microsoft Word was first called “Multi-tool
Word”